["Toreador song -
Aria of the hot spring manners" playing]
Aria of the hot spring manners" continues]
[music ends]
[Marcus] I'm begging you here, Lucius.
-[gentle music]
-Come on.
The client specifically requested you
'cause he heard about all your great work.
I don't trust the Augustales,
former slaves who make a show
of their new wealth.
The nouveau-riche are grotesque.
Hey now, don't be like that.
Will you just try to be nice, please?
I am very sorry, Marcus,
but this job isn't a good fit.
Listen, they're gonna pay us
some serious money, okay?
And I really need the money
'cause I hire a lot of old folks
and contractors,
so the going's been rough lately.
Look, they only offered me this job
because of you.
So I'm sorry to ask you this
but think of it like helping out a friend
who really needs it, okay?
-Please!
-Hmm!
Hello.
We're the mason and the bathhouse designer
that your master sent for.
Nice to meet you.
[tense music]
Wait right here.
[Lucius] "Here Augustales performed
acts of great charity
and offered food and drink onto the poor."
[man] Thank you so much, sir.
You've saved our lives.
[Lucius] Emphasis on "performed" it seems.
What a generous boost of their image
this will bring.
Oh, come on, Lucius,
they used to be slaves,
maybe they wished someone fed them
in the rain when they were poor.
[door rattles]
Enter. The master is ready for you now.
[upbeat music]
[Lucius gasping] Gods! This is hideous.
[master] There you are!
You've kept me waiting.
[grunts]
You must be the famous designer and mason
who worked for Emperor Hadrian.
Yep, that's us.
You have a lovely golden home here, sir.
[chuckles] Isn't it just?
-That vase over there--
-Pardon the interruption…
But my associate and I
are in quite a hurry.
[grunts] Yes, of course.
[master] I take it this area
will be large enough for you?
[Marcus] Wow! We can build
a gigantic bathhouse out here, Lucius!
[Lucius] Mm hmm.
I've sketched out all the plans
for what I've envisioned.
[groans]
-[dramatic piano music]
-[master] This bathhouse…
shall be based on the Domus Aurea.
It shall redefine the meaning
of the word "splendid".
Luxury alone isn't enough for me, you see.
I want a bathhouse fit for the gods.
[groaning softly]
And you shall chisel out a goddess
with the biggest rack in the cosmos.
-[dramatic music]
-[gasps]
Sure thing. You got the mon bags,
I'll make the fun bags.
[chuckles awkwardly]
Excellent! I see those big boulders now.
Make them so big, they'd give Diana…
[Lucius] How dare he ask me
to build such a disgraceful thing?
-I apologize, sir, but--
-He's in!
Right? You'd love to help.
[through gritted teeth]
Marcus, this is insane!
I'm begging you, Lucius.
Just do this for me.
[grunting softly] Very well.
If I must.
Sorry for the wait. Wine for two.
Hmm. Alright. [sighs]
How on earth am I to build the sort of
garish monstrosity that man wants from me?
I don't know.
How am I supposed to bang out
gigantic goddess knockers?
[Lucius] Well, what's done is done,
I suppose.
I shall give this my best effort
for the sake of your business and mine.
Well, as sorry as I am about all this,
I really appreciate it.
-[gentle music]
-[birds chirping]
[Lucius] He wishes for me
to make a golden bathhouse
in this verdant area…
Ah! There you are!
I'm delighted you accepted.
I've heard tale of the baths
you've constructed.
You're quite popular around the empire.
Yes, well, I'm not convinced
a golden bathhouse
will be quite as celebrated
as my other works.
I simply cannot relax in thermae
that have no character.
My, my, Sir Lucius.
I'm quite disappointed.
It seems you've spent too much time
with Emperor Hadrian.
You've lost sight
of what the common people desire.
The emperor may appreciate subtlety
but the common masses have no concept
of a bathhouse as character.
I know what it is like to be poor
and I know how the poor think.
They prefer the straightforward,
unlike you or the emperor.
-[Lucius grunts]
-Speaking of his majesty,
there have been rumors swirling about
that his condition these days
is rather unfavorable…
[exasperated]
Lies! His majesty is perfectly well!
Then hypothetically…
if your esteemed employer
were to tragically pass away,
would you like to come
and work exclusively for the Augustales?
I can guarantee you double
what he is paying you now.
Preposterous.
I work for Rome and for his majesty.
They earned my respect,
they did not purchase it!
Ah! It seems I've overstepped.
Your gold could never buy my loyalty!
Good day, sir!
[gasps] Stop!
[Lucius groans loudly]
TSUKIMI HOT SPRING IS UNDER RENOVATION
I LOVE YOUTOPIA - SUPER ROMAN SPA
[man] Picture it, kid.
I'm gonna make this place so hip
and modern and sexy,
everyone will want a piece.
Then, I'll be set for life.
You hear that, little koi?
We're gonna make some coin. [chuckles]
Hey, hey, hey, hey! Come here, you.
Aw, you sure are cuties, aren't you?
Hello, Marilyn,
who's my 2.8 million yen girl.
[architect] Uh, sir…
Just to confirm, this is supposed to be
an ancient Roman style bath, right?
In that case,
won't we have to fill in this pond?
[man sighs]
If you think you're gonna take my pond,
you are out of your tiny little gourd.
Huh? But there weren't any koi fish
in ancient Rome,
let alone fancy koi ponds like this one.
Damn it, egghead, do I look like
I care about accuracy?
But sir,
I thought you said you wanted the guest
to have a truly authentic
ancient Roman experience.
[gasping]
Okay, Yoshida, that's enough out of you.
Listen, nitwit, if I say I want
my ancient Rome to have a koi pond,
then it's gonna have a koi pond!
It's called glamour, you little ass!
[wheezing]
Why'd you have to go and piss him off,
huh?
[man] Speaking of glamour.
Behold the gold! [chuckling]
[groans softly]
[man]
We've also got these voluptuous Venuses
and of course my koi fish. [chuckling]
Throw this stuff together and ta-da,
it's ancient Rome!
See, I've got it all under control.
So less yammering and more hammering,
alright? [chuckles]
There you go. [laughing]
[sighs]
[cawing]
[man] Sorry, Yoshida.
I'm sure this is pretty different from
what you're used to with building houses.
But you know our company's
not doing so hot, right?
[Yoshida] I know, but…
It's just that you said this guy wanted
an authentic ancient Roman bath.
Now all the research I did
was for nothing.
I never imagined myself
building something like this.
Just try to let it go
and give the old man what he wants.
You know what they say,
the customer is always right.
I suppose.
Well, let's just call it a day
and head on home.
See you later.
Yeah, bye.
He says he wants us to
"remake the world of ancient Rome
with a Roman fantasy spa and wine cellar."
Imagine how horrible someone from
ancient Rome would feel if they saw this.
What am I supposed to do now?
-[water splashes]
-Huh?
[panting]
[grand triumphant music]
[gasping]
[shouting]
That's the super expensive one!
No, this is gonna cost us a fortune!
[sighs]
Where did this foreign guy come from?
[Lucius in Roman]
Rome. Is this a copy of the Roman bath?
Wait, did you just say Rome?
[Lucius] At last…
the time has come at last!
This land has finally been brought on
to the bath of the glorious Roman Empire!
[in Roman] My brother!
I understand! I will help you out!
[sneezes]
I'll go find you some clothes.
They got a real European designer!
But why didn't they tell us he was here?
[Lucius] This is quite
an excellent sketch, and yet…
Oh, so you don't really like
any of it, huh?
[in Roman] Do you even understand
the Roman culture
of bathhouses to begin with?
I'm sorry, could you repeat that, please?
[chuckles softly]
[in Roman] This is the basic architecture
of the Roman bathhouse.
That's a bathhouse design
that uses solar heating.
[Yoshida] Wow!
He drew it so fast!
This guy is definitely an expert.
It's exactly the same as the structures
I saw in my research on ancient Rome.
[lighthearted music]
[in Roman] What are these tasteless
and gaudy sculptures of Venus?
These are the appropriate sculptures
for bathhouses.
Male gods should be placed
near the baths as well. Next!
[Lucius] This is the bathing area
and this is the changing area.
Here onward, is the hallway
that leads to the kitchen…
[architect]
Whatever he's saying, he's way into it.
He's so intense.
It's almost like
he actually is from ancient Rome.
[in Roman] The tiles on the floor
should be mosaic. Do you understand?
Oh. I see now. It's a floor mosaic.
[in Roman] The ceiling must be like this.
[Yoshida] So the ceiling should be shaped
like an arch.
You know what?
-[upbeat music]
-I'm actually having fun with this!
It's strange.
I don't know how to explain it but…
when I'm with this guy,
I feel like I know what it was like
in ancient Roman bathhouses.
[Yoshida panting]
Hey, sorry to keep you
waiting like that, teach.
I checked on the site over there,
it's the only one with power, so…
Are you okay?
[in Roman] How beautiful.
The moon in your world is very beautiful.
It feels like Goddess Diana will appear.
[Yoshida] I still have no idea
what he's saying but…
the moon sure does look pretty tonight.
[in Roman] I came up with a good idea.
Flat-faced architect,
come with me!
It seems like he's got another idea.
This will be the wall of the bathhouse.
We will install a window here
that can open and close.
I think I understand
what he's trying to show me, but…
The beautiful moon that can be seen
from this bathhouse should be offered
to Goddess Diana, don't you agree?
What is this large object?
That's…
[tinkling]
You're going to place this gaudy tub
in Goddess Diana's bathhouse
with the view of the sacred moonlight?
[Yoshida] Oh man, he does not like
this thing. I'd better try to explain.
Hold on a second.
Sorry, I hope this makes sense.
I'm not the one making these choices.
MONEY
[sighs]
[in Roman] My brother.
Yeah.
[Lucius] We were born under the same star.
[in Roman] Create steps like this
on the borders of the bathtub,
so that people can sit down.
You understand, right? It's like a bench.
Is this a place where people can sit?
That would definitely make it easier
for older people to get in and out of it.
Hmm. This is amazing, teach, thank you.
[Lucius]
It seems only one problem remains here.
[Lucius] What shall we do with this?
Man, this thing really is over the top,
isn't it?
Hey, think we should…
-[gentle uplifting music]
-Kinkaku-ji!
[Yoshida] The golden pavilion in Kyoto!
This is our answer.
It uses gold in an understated way
but remains classy and glamorous.
It's perfect!
Although…
I guess that's not really authentic
if a Roman bath were to follow
traditional Japanese aesthetics.
Is he ruminating on the design
of this golden temple looking place?
I see.
So long as one can feel
the presence of the gods inside,
it conveys a sense of elegance
and grandeur whether gold or not.
[in Roman]
An indication of a sacred presence.
[grunts]
[Lucius, in Roman]
This is what I'm trying to explain.
Wait, Diana?
[in Roman] Diana is the Goddess
of the moon and the hunt.
[Lucius]
If you place her on top of the bathtub,
I think the golden splendor
will look very divine.
[Yoshida] So basically, he wants
to find some way to take the Diana statue
and combine it with the bathtub?
That's a great idea. But…
If we use this thing
as just another decoration,
the old man is gonna throw a fit.
It's more than you make in a year!
-[sneezes]
-Are you doing okay there, teach?
Wait here, I'll go buy you a coffee.
[Lucius]
I could certainly stand to wash my face.
-[water splashes]
-What was that noise?
It sounded like something fell
in the pond.
[birds chirping]
Huh? Teach?
Where did he go?
It is morning, maybe he went home.
Maybe I should just give up.
The old man is gonna go ballistic
if we tried to build this.
No. I'm gonna build it anyway!
Just watch, teach,
I'm gonna make you proud!
[upbeat music]
I LOVE YOUTOPIA SUPER ROMAN SPA
[man 1] You know,
I really liked this place before,
so I was pretty ticked
when I heard they turned it
into some kind of Euro trash-topia.
[man 2]
Yeah, I heard Roman bath
and pictured a big ugly toga party.
ROMAN FANTASTIC SPA, THIS WAY
[man 2] But something like this
isn't what I expected at all.
[man 1] Me either.
[sighs]
This place is pretty amazing.
Who would've ever thunk it, huh?
I've never felt so relaxed.
[man 3] Turns out Western buildings
are a little gaudy
but that's part of their charm
at the end of the day.
That's right, and coming here at night
is just fantastic.
I could soak right here until sunrise.
[man 1] Same here. I like that it still
feels like the old place, you know?
[man 2] Look at how the moon shines
down on that statue.
That there Western goddess
sure is a beaut.
[man 1] Say, does this place remind
anyone else of the golden pavilion?
[man chuckles]
Hey, kiddo.
I really got to thank you for building me
such a fine bathhouse here.
The theme is so popular,
I've been getting calls from magazines
and TV stations who want to interview me.
[chuckling] Isn't that swell?
[Yoshida] Our success and everything
that's happened here
are all thanks to you, teach.
I'm gonna keep working as hard as I can
and become an amazing designer some day,
just like you.
Everyone's been buzzing
about the Augustales bathhouse recently.
But do you know why
it's only open after dark?
Well, you'll see when you get in.
-[man] Make way.
-[chuckles softly]
It looks normal so far.
Actually, it seems to be on the old side.
-Just wait.
-I don't understand.
A drab overcrowded place
that only opens at night
can't possibly stay in business, can it?
[man] The bath itself seems the same
as always too.
I suppose the only unique thing about it
is the dim lighting in here.
Looks like it's time. Just keep your eyes
on that door over there.
[gasping]
Wow!
What do you think? Amazing, isn't it?
[man 2] The view of the statue
is so bewitchingly beautiful.
[man 1] Indeed. Doesn't it make you wish
she would turn to look at you?
And what's more, that strange engraved
lettering on the gold is so mysterious.
I wonder what it means.
[gentle uplifting music]
[master] I must give you credit,
Sir Lucius,
you were correct.
A mass of gold no matter how large
simply cannot compare
to its radiance when used sparingly.
It is truly the color of the gods.
I understand why his majesty
is so loathed to part with you.
Thank you, Lucius.
[Lucius] Once again, I have learned
so much from the flat faces.
Thanks to them, that gorgeous garment
with its stunning temple
and their beautiful moon,
I now understand the true value of gold.
I wonder if my flat-faced friend
is still hard at work now…
[Kenjiro Tsuda]
Thermae Romae. The Hot Spring Tour.
Author Ms. Mari Yamazaki
embarked on a journey to rediscover
Japan's bathing culture.
Enjoying the cuisine is one
of the highlights at the hot spring inn.
Today,
we will enjoy the kaiseki cuisine
at Hoshi Onsen.
Whenever I stay at these inns,
there are delicious meals waiting
for me after relaxing in the hot spring.
[Mari] I think
it’s the perfect way to spoil myself.
I'll… start with these sashimi.
[guide] As for the sashimi, that red fish
is a type of rainbow trout
called ginhikari,
and it’s a local specialty.
I'll try it.
I believe it has a very moist texture.
-It's delicious.
-Thank you.
It has a mild flavor.
As for the hot pot, we use a brand of pork
called the Josyu Mugibuta.
Oh, I see.
In foreign countries,
it’s rare to cook your own food
like this as you eat.
-[guide] I see.
-I’m sure everyone will enjoy this.
I see.
Let's try it.
-It's so soft.
-Yes, isn't it?
Yes.
Mmm.
It's delicious.
I can tell right away that it's good pork.
I'm glad.
What is this?
That is called okkirikomi.
[Mari] What's an okkirikomi?
[guide] It’s similar to udon.
It’s a local Gunma specialty.
That's why we added this dish.
I'll try it.
It warms me up.
Yes.
All of the dishes have
a gentle flavor to it.
This is called the "char kotsuzake."
-Char kotsuzake?
-That's right.
The char is grilled
and hot Japanese sake is poured over it.
Oh, you're right.
-Wow, the char is steeped in sake!
-It's grilled.
-May I try it?
-Yes, please.
Wow. This is addicting.
It’s a soup-style sake.
That's right.
-It's very smooth.
-This char makes excellent stock.
Yes.
It's wonderful.
-[lively shamisen music]
-[Kenjiro Tsuda] Thermae Memory.
Ms. Mari Yamazaki
sketched a memorable moment
from this trip.
THIS IS THE BEST PART OF STAYING
AT A HOT SPRING INN
[Mari] This drawing describes
how I was taken over by Lucius.
I can enjoy the hot spring,
eat delicious food,
and let go of all the fatigue and troubles
that tend to build up day by day.
So that I can renew myself
and start afresh.
Right now, I am realizing the true value
of the hot spring and the hot spring inn.
[Kenjiro Tsuda] What kind of adventure
awaits us next time?
Ms. Yamazaki's journey will continue.
[gentle uplifting music]